.\" BrieFS on-disk format man page
.\" To install: cp briefs.5 /usr/share/man/man5/ ; mandb
.TH BRIEFS 5 "2026-06-21" "BrieFS v0.9.3" "File formats"
.SH NAME
briefs \- the BrieFS extents-and-tries filesystem on-disk format
.SH DESCRIPTION
BrieFS is an experimental Linux filesystem designed as a teaching and
research vehicle.  It stores file data with extents, directory contents in
trie structures, and uses bitmap pyramids for inode and data-block allocation.
.PP
This manual describes the on-disk format used by BrieFS volumes created with
.BR mkfs.briefs (8)
and checked with
.BR fsck.briefs (8).
The authoritative version is v0.9.3.
.SH OVERVIEW
A BrieFS volume is laid out as a sequence of fixed-size blocks, defaulting to
4096 bytes.  Block addresses are absolute 64-bit block numbers starting at 0.
The basic layout is:
.PP
.nf
    Block 0              Superblock (1024 bytes; rest of block reserved)
    Block 1..N           Inode table
    Next region(s)        Inode bitmap pyramid, data-block bitmap pyramid
    Data region          File data blocks, directory-trie pages, B-tree nodes
    End of volume        Journal ring
.fi
.PP
Exact offsets are stored in the superblock and vary with volume geometry and
formatting options.
.SH SUPERBLOCK
The superblock occupies the first 1024 bytes of block 0.  The remainder of
block 0 is unused.  It is encoded in little endian and starts with:
.PP
.nf
    Offset  Size  Field
      0       8   magic          0x504C434E ("PLCN")
      8       8   major_version
     16       8   minor_version
     24       8   patch_version
     32       8   total_blocks
     40       8   data_blocks
     48       8   block_size
     56       8   inode_size
     64       8   blocks_per_group
     72       8   inodes_per_group
     80       8   fs_created     seconds since epoch
     88       8   fs_last_mounted
     96       8   fs_last_checkpoint
    104       8   free_data_blocks
    112       8   free_inodes
    120       8   root_inode_number
    128       8   feature_compat
    136       8   feature_ro_compat
    144       8   feature_incompat
    152      16   uuid
.fi
.PP
The metadata-pointer region follows at byte 168:
.PP
.nf
    Offset  Size  Field
    168       8   eat_offset
    176       8   eat_blocks
    184       8   trie_root_block
    192       8   trie_blocks_used
    200       8   trie_node_pool_start
    208       8   trie_node_pool_size
    216       8   inode_bitmap_offset
    224       8   inode_bitmap_blocks
    232       8   inode_table_offset
    240       8   journal_offset
    248       8   journal_blocks
    256       8   checkpoint_seq
    264       8   journal_log_start
    272       8   journal_log_end
    280      32   reserved_journal[4]
    312      64   label (UTF-8, NUL padded)
    376     648   reserved
.fi
.PP
The superblock is 1024 bytes in total.  Volumes are expected to have a block
size of at least 1024 bytes; the default is 4096.
.SS Feature bits
The
.B feature_incompat
field at offset 144 gates the on-disk format.  Currently only one bit is
defined:
.TP
.B 0x0000000000000001
B+ tree extent index (introduced in BrieFS v0.9.0).
.PP
A BrieFS implementation must reject any volume whose
.B feature_incompat
contains bits it does not understand.
.SH INODES
Each inode is 512 bytes.  Inode 1 is the root directory; inode 2 is reserved as
the bad-inode marker.  The inode table is stored starting at the block given
by
.BR inode_table_offset .
Inode records are stored little endian on disk
(as
.BR "struct briefs_disk_inode" ).
An inode record contains:
.PP
.nf
    Offset  Size  Field
      0       8   inode_number
      8       8   magic          0x494E4F44 ("INOD")
     16       4   filemode
     20       4   uid
     24       4   gid
     28       4   _pad0
     32       8   filesize
     40       8   ctime_sec
     48       8   ctime_nsec
     56       8   atime_sec
     64       8   atime_nsec
     72       8   mtime_sec
     80       8   mtime_nsec
     88       8   creation_time_sec
     96       8   creation_time_nsec
    104       4   nlinks
    108       4   num_extents_inline
    112       8   extent_inline_base
    120       8   num_extents_total
    128     256   inline region (extents or inline data)
    384       8   xattr_offset
    392       8   xattr_size
    400       8   parent_inode
    408       4   unused
    412       4   flags
    416       8   dir_trie_root
    424       8   rdev
    432       8   generation
    440      72   reserved
.fi
.PP
The inline region may hold either up to 8 inline extent records (32 bytes each)
or 256 bytes of inline file data / symlink target.  Which interpretation is
valid depends on the file type and inode flags.
.SS Inode flags
.TP
.B 0x00000001
InodeFlagReserved \- reserved.
.TP
.B 0x00000002
InodeFlagCompressed \- defined but unused in v0.9.3.
.TP
.B 0x00000004
InodeFlagIndexed \- the inode uses a B+ tree extent index for its extents.
.TP
.B 0x00000008
InodeFlagInlineData \- the inline region stores file data rather than extents.
.PP
The remaining bits are reserved.
.SH EXTENTS
Each extent record is 32 bytes, stored little endian on disk
(as
.BR "struct briefs_disk_extent" ):
.PP
.nf
    Offset  Size  Field
      0       8   offset         logical block offset in file
      8       8   phys           absolute physical block number
     16       8   len            length in blocks
     24       4   flags
     28       4   pad
.fi
.PP
.SS Extent flags
The
.B flags
field at offset 24 currently defines one bit:
.TP
.B 0x00000001
Unwritten \- the extent was allocated by
.BR fallocate (2)
but has not yet been written to.  Its blocks are zeroed at allocation time, so
reads return zeros, but the extent is reported as
.B FIEMAP_EXTENT_UNWRITTEN
by
.BR fiemap (2)
until a write converts it (clearing the bit).  A write into any block of an
unwritten extent converts the whole extent to written in place (no split); the
blocks are already zeroed, so this only changes the reported state, not the
data.  The remaining bits are reserved.
.PP
An inode may store up to 8 extents inline.  When a file grows beyond 8
extents, the inline extents are migrated into a B+ tree extent index, the
InodeFlagIndexed bit is set, and
.B extent_inline_base
records the absolute block number of the root B-tree node.
.SH B+ TREE EXTENT INDEX
B+ tree nodes are exactly one block in size.  The node header is 24 bytes:
.PP
.nf
    Offset  Size  Field
      0       4   magic          0x42545245 ("BTRE")
      4       4   flags          bit 0 = leaf
      8       2   level          0 = leaf
     10       2   num_keys
     12       4   reserved       padding before the aligned next_leaf
     16       8   next_leaf      leaf nodes only; 0 if none
.fi
.PP
Leaf nodes contain up to 126 extent records, followed by 24 padding bytes,
a checksum at byte 4080, and 8 unused slack bytes at 4088.  Internal nodes
contain up to 253 index entries (child block and high key) plus a trailing
child pointer.  The checksum is a CRC32C over bytes 0 through 4079.
.SH DIRECTORIES
Directories store their entries in trie structures.  In the current on-disk
format (v0.7.0 and later), trie nodes are packed into 4 KiB pages allocated
from the data-block region.
.SS Packed trie page
Each page starts with a 20-byte header and then provides 64 node slots:
.PP
.nf
    Offset  Size  Field
      0       4   magic           0x54524E50 ("TRNP")
      4       4   version         1
      8       2   live_count      number of allocated slots
     10       2   free_name_off   bytes of name heap used, from end of block
     12       8   free_slots      bitmap of free slots (bit i set == free)
.fi
.PP
Names are stored in a heap that grows upward from the end of the block toward
the slot array.  Node references are encoded as:
.PP
.nf
    ref = (absolute_block_number << 6) | slot_index
.fi
.PP
A reference value of 0 means "null".  Slot 0 of each page is the root node
for that page.  The page magic is 0x54524E50 ("TRNP").
.SS Trie node
Each packed trie node is 36 bytes:
.PP
.nf
    Offset  Size  Field
      0       8   first_child      node reference, or 0 if none
      8       8   next_sibling     node reference, or 0 if none
     16       8   inode            inode number (leaf entries; 0 otherwise)
     24       2   name_len         full name length + 2-byte prefix, or 0 if free
     26       2   name_offset      offset from block end to name bytes, or 0 if free
     28       1   depth            depth in trie (0 = root)
     29       1   node_type        NODE_TYPE_* value
     30       1   byte_val         the byte value this node represents
     31       1   f_type           file type for leaf entries (S_IFMT >> 12)
     32       2   flags            NODE_FLAG_* value
     34       2   child_count      number of children
.fi
.SS Node types
.TP
.B 0x01
file entry
.TP
.B 0x02
directory entry
.TP
.B 0x04
intermediate (branching) node
.TP
.B 0x08
NODE_STATUS_LEAF \- set on intermediate nodes that also hold a leaf entry
.PP
The
.B dir_trie_root
field in a directory inode holds the packed node reference of the directory's
trie root.
.SH ALLOCATION
Inodes and data blocks are each tracked by a three-level bitmap pyramid
(see
.BR "struct briefs_alloc"
in
.BR briefs_alloc.h ).
A pyramid is rooted at a pool block and begins with a 48-byte
.BR alloc_pool_header :
.PP
.nf
    Offset  Size  Field
      0       4   magic            ALLOC_MAGIC
      4       4   version          1
      8       8   l0_words         number of u64 words in level 0
     16       8   l1_words         number of u64 words in level 1
     24       8   l2_words         number of u64 words in level 2
     32       8   block_count      total blocks tracked
     40       8   free_count       total free blocks
.fi
.PP
The inode-allocator pyramid is rooted at the block given by
.BR inode_bitmap_offset .
The data-block allocator pyramid is rooted at the block given by
.BR trie_node_pool_start
(and sized by
.BR trie_node_pool_size );
the kernel mount path reads its pool header from there.  The superblock fields
.BR eat_offset
and
.BR eat_blocks
are legacy and are not read by the kernel.
.PP
Directory-trie pages, B-tree nodes, and file-data blocks all come from the
single data-block region.
.SH JOURNAL
The journal is a ring of blocks at the end of the volume, starting at
.BR journal_offset
and containing
.BR journal_blocks
blocks.  It records metadata-only transactions; ordinary file writeback is
not journaled.
.PP
Each journal block begins with a 16-byte header:
.PP
.nf
    Offset  Size  Field
      0       4   magic          0x4A4E4C5A ("JNLZ")
      4       4   block_seq      monotonically increasing
      8       4   record_count
     12       4   reserved
.fi
.PP
Records follow the header.  Each record has a 16-byte header
(type, flags, data length, CRC32C checksum) followed by type-specific data.
.SS Journal record types
.TP
.B 0
JRN_NONE
.TP
.B 1
JRN_EXTENT_ALLOC
.TP
.B 2
JRN_EXTENT_FREE
.TP
.B 3
JRN_INODE_UPDATE
.TP
.B 4
JRN_INODE_ALLOC
.TP
.B 5
JRN_INODE_FREE
.TP
.B 6
JRN_TRIE_ALLOC
.TP
.B 7
JRN_DIR_UPDATE
.TP
.B 8
JRN_CHECKPOINT
.TP
.B 9
JRN_INODE_FULL \- complete 512-byte disk-inode snapshot
.TP
.B 10
JRN_SYMLINK_DATA
.TP
.B 11
JRN_XATTR_DATA \- content of an inode's xattr block (crash-restore)
.TP
.B 12
JRN_END
.PP
A checkpoint record (JRN_CHECKPOINT) stores the checkpoint sequence, the
record count, the end of the live log sequence, the trie root, the free
data-block count, and the free-inode count, allowing replay to establish a
consistent mount state.  The checkpoint record is written to a dedicated
checkpoint block that is distinct from the ordinary journal-block stream: that
block carries magic
.B 0x43485053
("CHPS")
.RB ( CHECKPOINT_MAGIC ),
rather than the JNLZ journal-block magic.  The journal ring skips this last
block (the checkpoint block) to avoid wrapping ambiguity.
.SH EXTENDED ATTRIBUTES
BrieFS supports three extended-attribute namespaces:
.BR user.* ,
.BR trusted.*
(requires
.BR CAP_SYS_ADMIN ),
and
.BR security.*
(for LSM labels).  POSIX ACLs
.RB ( system.posix_acl_access / system.posix_acl_default )
are not supported.
.PP
Each inode may own at most one external 4096-byte xattr block, allocated from
the data block pool (the same allocator that backs directory-trie pages and
B+ tree nodes) and referenced by the inode's
.B xattr_offset
(absolute block number; 0 means no block) and
.B xattr_size
(bytes of the block actually in use).  There is no inline xattr storage in
the inode.
.PP
The block is a flat BrieFS-native layout (not ext2's bidirectional fill):
.PP
.nf
    Offset  Size   Field
      0       4    magic          0x58415454 ("XATT")
      4       4    version        1
      8       4    used_size      header + entries + name/value bytes
     12       4    entry_count
     16     8*N    briefs_xattr_entry[entry_count]
   ...           name/value bytes (4-byte aligned)
   4080      8    CRC32C over [0,4080)
   4088      8    slack
.fi
.PP
Each 8-byte entry is
.RB ( struct briefs_xattr_entry ):
.PP
.nf
    Offset  Size  Field
      0       2   name_len      full name incl. prefix, no NUL
      2       2   value_len     0 means no value
      4       2   name_offset   from block start
      6       2   value_offset  from block start, 0 if value_len==0
.fi
.PP
Names are stored with their namespace prefix
(e.g.
.BR user.foo ,
.BR trusted.bar ,
.BR security.baz ).
Empty values use
.B value_len
\== 0 and
.BR value_offset \= 0 .
.PP
A journal record (JRN_XATTR_DATA) carries the block content for
crash-recovery: xattr blocks are user data that cannot be re-derived from
other journal records (unlike directory tries), so each block write logs its
content before the JRN_INODE_FULL that publishes
.BR xattr_offset .
On replay, pass 1 reserves the named block in the allocator and pass 2
restores the content, zeroes the tail, and recomputes the CRC.
Because a journal record must fit in one 4096-byte journal block (4064 bytes
of payload after the 16-byte block and record headers), the fixed 20-byte
record prefix caps
.B used_size
at 4044 bytes
.RB ( BRIEFS_XATTR_MAX_USED ).
.PP
A single name+value that cannot fit in the block returns
.B ERANGE
to
.BR setxattr (2);
an assembled set that exceeds 4044 bytes returns
.BR ENOSPC .
.B XATTR_CREATE
and
.B XATTR_REPLACE
are enforced
.RB ( EEXIST / ENODATA ).
.SH CHECKSUMS
BrieFS uses CRC32C for metadata integrity:
.IP \(bu 2
Journal record headers include a CRC32C of the record payload.
.IP \(bu 2
Journal block payloads are checksummed as part of their records.
.IP \(bu 2
B+ tree extent-index nodes carry a CRC32C at byte 4080 covering bytes 0\-4079.
.IP \(bu 2
Directory-trie pages have their own checksum field in the page header.
.IP \(bu 2
Xattr blocks carry a CRC32C at byte 4080 covering bytes 0\-4079 (a zero
stored CRC is treated as legacy/valid).
.SH LIMITS
The on-disk fields are wide, so the binding limits are mostly VFS ceilings or
allocator/encoding widths rather than the disk types themselves.
.PP
.IP \(bu 2
Block size: effectively fixed at 4096 bytes.
.B mkfs.briefs
accepts
.B \-b
with any power of two, but the kernel module hardcodes
.BR sb_set_blocksize ( sb , 4096 )
and the on-disk layout assumes 4096 throughout; only 4096 actually mounts.
.IP \(bu 2
File size: the VFS ceiling
.BR MAX_LFS_FILESIZE
(2^63\-1 bytes on 64-bit, \[ti]8 EiB), set as
.IR s_maxbytes .
The allocator returns ENOSPC long before this binds for any real volume.
Inline data is at most 256 bytes; a file uses up to 8 inline extents before
spilling into the B+ tree extent index.
.IP \(bu 2
Volume size: directory-trie node references encode the block number in the top
58 bits of a 64-bit word
.RB ( block " << " 6 " | " slot ),
so the practical ceiling is 2^58 blocks, i.e. 2^58 \[mu] 4096 = 2^70 bytes
(\[ti]1 ZiB). The on-disk
.I total_blocks
is a full 64-bit field (2^64 blocks theoretical), and
.B mkfs.briefs
imposes no upper cap, only a minimum.
.IP \(bu 2
Directories: there is no per-directory entry cap (no ext2-style 32000 limit).
A trie page holds 64 nodes per 4 KiB and chains on demand, bounded only by free
space. Entry names are limited to
.B NAME_MAX
(255 bytes).
.IP \(bu 2
Hard links: the on-disk link count is a 32-bit field (\[ti]4.29\[mu]10^9),
well beyond the VFS
.B LINK_MAX
(65000).
A directory's link count is 2 plus its subdirectory count.
.IP \(bu 2
Symbolic links: targets up to 256 bytes are stored inline in the inode; longer
targets use ordinary data extents, up to the file-size limit above.
.IP \(bu 2
Inodes: the inode number is a 64-bit field.
.B mkfs.briefs
provisions one inode per
.IR inode-ratio
blocks (default 8, minimum 100), so a freshly made filesystem has
totalBlocks / inode-ratio inodes available.
.IP \(bu 2
Timestamps: on disk, 64-bit seconds plus 64-bit nanoseconds, at 1 ns granularity
.RB ( s_time_gran = 1 ).
BrieFS does not set
.I s_time_min
or
.IR s_time_max ,
so the VFS defaults apply
.RB ( TIME64_MIN " to " TIME64_MAX ,
\[+-](2^63\[mi]1) seconds from the epoch, \[ti]\[+-]292 billion years).
BrieFS never clamps timestamps, so values outside the representable range are
rejected by the VFS rather than silently wrapped.
.IP \(bu 2
Journal: a fixed-size metadata-only ring, 64 blocks by default
.RB ( \-j ),
with a separate checkpoint block. There is no data journaling.
.SH LIMITATIONS
The following are intentionally not implemented in v0.9.3:
.PP
.IP \(bu 2
No data journaling: buffered writes require an explicit flush or fsync to be
durable.
.IP \(bu 2
No POSIX ACLs, quotas, reflink/COW, fscrypt, fsverity, or online resize
(extended attributes and direct I/O are supported; see the EXTENDED
ATTRIBUTES section above).
.IP \(bu 2
B+ tree node splits are not themselves journaled; crash recovery relies on
ordered writeback and, if necessary, offline repair with
.BR fsck.briefs (8).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/share/man/man8/mkfs.briefs.8
mkfs.briefs manual page
.TP
.I /usr/share/man/man8/fsck.briefs.8
fsck.briefs manual page
.TP
.I /usr/share/man/man8/fuse.briefs.8
fuse.briefs manual page
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkfs.briefs (8),
.BR fsck.briefs (8),
.BR fuse.briefs (8),
.BR mount (8)
.SH AUTHORS
BrieFS was written by Jeremy Bingham.
.PP
The latest source is available at
.UR https://github.com/ctdk/briefs
.UE .
